# Physicochemical and Pharmacokinetic Properties Determining Drug Detection in Skin: A Machine Learning Approach

> ## Abstract
> 
> Chemicals, including some systemically administered xenobiotics and their biotransformations, can be detected noninvasively using skin swabs and untargeted metabolomics analysis. We sought to understand the principal drivers that determine whether a drug taken orally or systemically will be observed on the epidermis. We created an advanced machine learning model using a random forest classifier to predict which drugs would be detected on the skin. A variety of molecular descriptors describing important properties such as topology, mass, and charge of drugs was utilized.  The mean area under the ROC curve was 0.71 for predicting drug observation on the epidermis.  The SHAP model interpretation technique was used to determine the most relevant molecular descriptors. In addition, we selected 2,561 FDA approved drugs from DrugBank and their major biotransformations to further test the model. We predict that certain therapeutic drug classes may be more likely to be detected on the skin, such as nervous system drugs. The variability of epidermis detection within each drug class ranged from 35–60%, which likely reflects that the complex process of drugs moving from the systemic circulation to the skin surface is more dependent on the physicochemical properties of the drug rather than pharmacologic class. Detecting drugs and other chemicals noninvasively on the skin using untargeted metabolomics could be an important clinical advancement in therapeutic drug monitoring, adherence, and health status.

This repository contains machine learning and analysis code associated with the following publication:

- Rohit S. Advani, Wout Bittremieux, Alan K. Jarmusch, Shaden Aguirre, Aileen Lu, Pieter C. Dorrestein, Shirley M. Tsunoda. **Physicochemical and Pharmacokinetic Properties Determining Drug Detection in Skin: A Machine Learning Approach.** _publication pending_ (2021).
